README.md, before:

# UWAttend - Group 27 (CITS3200)

UWAttend is a web-based application written in Flask that is designed to simplify and streamline the process of student sign-ins and sign-outs for university classes. This app helps class facilitators track student participation and manage grading and aims to replace hand-written attendance tracking.

## Manual
For more information on how to use UWAttend, visit the following: [MANUAL.pdf](MANUAL.pdf)

## Prerequisites
To run UWAttend on your own machine, you must have the following dependencies installed on your system:

- **Python 3.x:** Required to run the application
- **Pip:** Python's package installer
- **sqlcipher** Required to encrypt and decrypt the database
# on an AWS EC2 instance install git
sudo yum install git

# use WINSCP to copy the filename.pem file to the EC2 instance
# make the file read-write only by the ownder
chmod 600 filename .pem
# add the passkey to ssh
ssh-add ./path/filename.pem

## Installation
### Clone the Repository
To get started, clone the repository:

``` shell
git clone https://github.com/DeltaO3/UWAttend---3200_27.git UWAttend
cd UWAttend
```

### Setting Up the Environment
1. Create the Python Virtual Environment and activate it:

``` shell
python3 -m venv venv
source ./venv/bin/activate
```

2. Install the required dependencies:

``` shell
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Setting up .env Secret Keys
UWAttend utilises secret keys located in `.env` for security purposes. Create a file called `.env` in the project root directory and set the following:

``` shell
SECRET_KEY="insert_key_here"
DATABASE_PASSWORD="insert_key_here"

# UWAttend uses boto3 to send emails using Amazon SES.
# You must set up SES inorder for the email functionality to work. 
# If you don't have SES, you will need to set up Admin account variables below in order to start using the app.
AWS_ACCESS_KEY="insert_key_key"
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="insert_key_here"

# Optional Admin Account Variables if you want to add an extra admin user
EMAIL="sampleemail@gmail.com"
FIRSTNAME="John"
LASTNAME="Smith"
PASSWORD="password"
USERTYPE="admin"

```
*Note: replace `"insert_key_here"` with your desired values*

- `SECRET_KEY` - The key to initialise SQLalchemy
- `DATABASE_PASSWORD` - The password that will be used to encrypt `app.db`

### Database Setup
1. Initialise the Database Schema:

``` shell
flask db upgrade
```

2. Populate the Database (Will not work without setting up Amazon SES credentials):

``` shell
python3 -m app.testdb
```

3. Add any additional admins to the database (OPTIONAL)

``` shell
python3 -m app.createadmin.py
```

## Running UWAttend
Now that all the dependencies are set up, you can now run the flask app.

To start the web-app, run the following:

``` shell
flask run
```
This will host the application at http://127.0.0.1:5000

## Database Schema

This database schema is designed to manage the different entities and relationships within the **UWAttend** system, such as users, sessions, units, attendance, and student information. Below is an explanation of the purpose of each table and its respective columns.

---

### 1. **alembic_version Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks the version of the database schema managed by Alembic (a database migration tool). This helps manage database migrations to ensure the schema is up to date.
- **Columns**:
  - `version_num`: A unique version identifier for the current schema state.

---

### 2. **session Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about individual class sessions for a unit. Each session is linked to a unit and tracks the session name, time, and date.
- **Columns**:
  - `sessionID`: The unique identifier for each session.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key linking to the **unit** table, indicating which unit the session belongs to.
  - `sessionName`: The name of the session (e.g., Lab, Lecture).
  - `sessionTime`: The time when the session takes place (e.g., Morning, Afternoon).
  - `sessionDate`: The date of the session.
  
---

### 3. **Units_Coordinators_Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks which users are coordinators for specific units. It links users to units and enforces that only designated coordinators can manage unit-specific tasks.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table, representing the coordinator.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, indicating which unit the coordinator is responsible for.

---

### 4. **Units_Facilitators_Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks which users are facilitators for specific units. Facilitators are responsible for managing sessions and student attendance within the unit.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table, representing the facilitator.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, indicating which unit the facilitator is assigned to.

---

### 5. **attendance Table**
- **Purpose**: This table logs attendance records for each student in a session, including sign-in and sign-out times, facilitator details, and session-related comments.
- **Columns**:
  - `attendanceID`: The unique identifier for each attendance record.
  - `sessionID`: A foreign key referencing the **session** table, linking the attendance to a specific session.
  - `studentID`: A foreign key referencing the **student** table, identifying the student attending the session.
  - `signInTime`: The time the student signed in for the session.
  - `signOutTime`: The time the student signed out (optional).
  - `facilitatorID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table (as a facilitator), indicating who facilitated the session.
  - `marks`: Any grades or marks awarded during the session (optional).
  - `comments`: Comments or feedback about the student's participation in the session (optional).
  - `consent_given`: Indicates whether the student has given consent for their participation to be recorded.

---

### 6. **student Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about each student enrolled in a unit, including personal details and consent status.
- **Columns**:
  - `studentID`: The unique identifier for each student.
  - `studentNumber`: The student’s university-assigned number.
  - `firstName`: The student's first name.
  - `lastName`: The student's last name.
  - `title`: The student’s title (e.g., Mr., Ms., Dr.).
  - `preferredName`: The name the student prefers to be called.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, linking the student to a specific unit.
  - `consent`: Indicates whether the student has provided consent for their participation to be recorded.

---

### 7. **unit Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about the academic units (courses), including session configurations and related settings for the unit.
- **Columns**:
  - `unitID`: The unique identifier for each unit.
  - `unitCode`: The unique code for the course (e.g., CITS3000).
  - `unitName`: The name of the course (e.g., Computing 101).
  - `studyPeriod`: The academic period or semester in which the unit runs.
  - `startDate`: The date when the unit begins.
  - `endDate`: The date when the unit ends.
  - `sessionNames`: Names of the sessions associated with the unit (e.g., Lecture, Lab).
  - `sessionTimes`: Times when the sessions for the unit occur (e.g., Morning, Afternoon).
  - `comments`: A boolean value indicating whether comments are enabled for this unit.
  - `marks`: A boolean value indicating whether marks are assigned for this unit.
  - `consent`: A boolean value indicating whether consent is required for this unit.
  - `commentSuggestions`: Suggested comments that can be used by facilitators for feedback.

---

### 8. **user Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about the users of the system, including administrators, coordinators, and facilitators. Each user has a role and login credentials.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: The unique identifier for each user.
  - `userType`: The type of user (e.g., admin, coordinator, facilitator).
  - `firstName`: The first name of the user.
  - `lastName`: The last name of the user.
  - `passwordHash`: The hashed password used for login authentication.
  - `email`: The email address of the user (unique).
  - `token`: Optional field for storing a session or authentication token.

## Project File Summary

### `createadmin.py`
This script is responsible for creating an admin user in the system, initialising the required administrator account for the application.

### `database.py`
Handles the configuration and connection to the database, including initialising the database models and performing database-related tasks.

### `forms.py`
Contains the form definitions used throughout the application, typically with Flask-WTF, for handling form validation and user inputs on the frontend.

### `helpers.py`
Includes utility functions or helper methods that perform common tasks needed across the application, such as formatting or shared logic.

### `__init__.py`
Initialises the Flask app and sets up configurations, routing, and extensions. This is the entry point for the app's core setup.

### `models.py`
Defines the data models (tables) for the application using an ORM (like SQLAlchemy). This file contains the structure for the database tables and relationships.

### `routes.py`
Defines the routes or endpoints for the web application. It maps URLs to their corresponding view functions, handling requests and responses.

### `static`
Contains static files such as JavaScript, CSS, and other resources (e.g., CSV templates). These files are used to enhance the frontend of the application.

### `templates`
Houses all the HTML files used in the application, following the Jinja2 templating system. These templates define the structure and layout of the web pages rendered by the Flask app.

### `testdb.py`
A script for initialising or populating the database with test data.

### `utilities.py`
Contains utility functions specific to various parts of the application, such as data processing, reading files, or performing operations that don't fit directly into the models or routes.

Commit message:

Update readme to include setting mock email env var

README.md, after:

# UWAttend - Group 27 (CITS3200)

UWAttend is a web-based application written in Flask that is designed to simplify and streamline the process of student sign-ins and sign-outs for university classes. This app helps class facilitators track student participation and manage grading and aims to replace hand-written attendance tracking.

## Manual
For more information on how to use UWAttend, visit the following: [MANUAL.pdf](MANUAL.pdf)

## Prerequisites
To run UWAttend on your own machine, you must have the following dependencies installed on your system:

- **Python 3.x:** Required to run the application
- **Pip:** Python's package installer
- **sqlcipher** Required to encrypt and decrypt the database
# on an AWS EC2 instance install git
sudo yum install git

# use WINSCP to copy the filename.pem file to the EC2 instance
# make the file read-write only by the ownder
chmod 600 filename .pem
# add the passkey to ssh
ssh-add ./path/filename.pem

## Installation
### Clone the Repository
To get started, clone the repository:

``` shell
git clone https://github.com/DeltaO3/UWAttend---3200_27.git UWAttend
cd UWAttend
```

### Setting Up the Environment
1. Create the Python Virtual Environment and activate it:

``` shell
python3 -m venv venv
source ./venv/bin/activate
```

2. Install the required dependencies:

``` shell
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```

3. Setting up .env Secret Keys
UWAttend utilises secret keys located in `.env` for security purposes. Create a file called `.env` in the project root directory and set the following:

``` shell
SECRET_KEY="insert_key_here"
DATABASE_PASSWORD="insert_key_here"

# UWAttend uses boto3 to send emails using Amazon SES.
# You must set up SES inorder for the email functionality to work. 
# If you don't have SES, you will need to set up Admin account variables below in order to start using the app.
AWS_ACCESS_KEY="insert_key_key"
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY="insert_key_here"

# Optional Admin Account Variables if you want to add an extra admin user
EMAIL="sampleemail@gmail.com"
FIRSTNAME="John"
LASTNAME="Smith"
PASSWORD="password"
USERTYPE="admin"

```
*Note: replace `"insert_key_here"` with your desired values*

- `SECRET_KEY` - The key to initialise SQLalchemy
- `DATABASE_PASSWORD` - The password that will be used to encrypt `app.db`

If running the app in development without the required setup for emails, set USE_MOCK_EMAIL to 'true' (a string).
When an email is 'sent' in this mode, the link (create account or reset password) is instead printed to the terminal, and can be used as usual:

``` shell
USE_MOCK_EMAIL='true'
```

If proper email function should be used (i.e. where AWS is set up), unset this environment variable, or set it to anything other than 'true' (e.g. 'false'):

``` shell
unset USE_MOCK_EMAIL
USE_MOCK_EMAIL='false'
```

### Database Setup
1. Initialise the Database Schema:

``` shell
flask db upgrade
```

2. Populate the Database (Will not work without setting up Amazon SES credentials):

``` shell
python3 -m app.testdb
```

3. Add any additional admins to the database (OPTIONAL)

``` shell
python3 -m app.createadmin.py
```

## Running UWAttend
Now that all the dependencies are set up, you can now run the flask app.

To start the web-app, run the following:

``` shell
flask run
```
This will host the application at http://127.0.0.1:5000

## Database Schema

This database schema is designed to manage the different entities and relationships within the **UWAttend** system, such as users, sessions, units, attendance, and student information. Below is an explanation of the purpose of each table and its respective columns.

---

### 1. **alembic_version Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks the version of the database schema managed by Alembic (a database migration tool). This helps manage database migrations to ensure the schema is up to date.
- **Columns**:
  - `version_num`: A unique version identifier for the current schema state.

---

### 2. **session Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about individual class sessions for a unit. Each session is linked to a unit and tracks the session name, time, and date.
- **Columns**:
  - `sessionID`: The unique identifier for each session.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key linking to the **unit** table, indicating which unit the session belongs to.
  - `sessionName`: The name of the session (e.g., Lab, Lecture).
  - `sessionTime`: The time when the session takes place (e.g., Morning, Afternoon).
  - `sessionDate`: The date of the session.
  
---

### 3. **Units_Coordinators_Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks which users are coordinators for specific units. It links users to units and enforces that only designated coordinators can manage unit-specific tasks.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table, representing the coordinator.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, indicating which unit the coordinator is responsible for.

---

### 4. **Units_Facilitators_Table**
- **Purpose**: This table tracks which users are facilitators for specific units. Facilitators are responsible for managing sessions and student attendance within the unit.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table, representing the facilitator.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, indicating which unit the facilitator is assigned to.

---

### 5. **attendance Table**
- **Purpose**: This table logs attendance records for each student in a session, including sign-in and sign-out times, facilitator details, and session-related comments.
- **Columns**:
  - `attendanceID`: The unique identifier for each attendance record.
  - `sessionID`: A foreign key referencing the **session** table, linking the attendance to a specific session.
  - `studentID`: A foreign key referencing the **student** table, identifying the student attending the session.
  - `signInTime`: The time the student signed in for the session.
  - `signOutTime`: The time the student signed out (optional).
  - `facilitatorID`: A foreign key referencing the **user** table (as a facilitator), indicating who facilitated the session.
  - `marks`: Any grades or marks awarded during the session (optional).
  - `comments`: Comments or feedback about the student's participation in the session (optional).
  - `consent_given`: Indicates whether the student has given consent for their participation to be recorded.

---

### 6. **student Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about each student enrolled in a unit, including personal details and consent status.
- **Columns**:
  - `studentID`: The unique identifier for each student.
  - `studentNumber`: The student’s university-assigned number.
  - `firstName`: The student's first name.
  - `lastName`: The student's last name.
  - `title`: The student’s title (e.g., Mr., Ms., Dr.).
  - `preferredName`: The name the student prefers to be called.
  - `unitID`: A foreign key referencing the **unit** table, linking the student to a specific unit.
  - `consent`: Indicates whether the student has provided consent for their participation to be recorded.

---

### 7. **unit Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about the academic units (courses), including session configurations and related settings for the unit.
- **Columns**:
  - `unitID`: The unique identifier for each unit.
  - `unitCode`: The unique code for the course (e.g., CITS3000).
  - `unitName`: The name of the course (e.g., Computing 101).
  - `studyPeriod`: The academic period or semester in which the unit runs.
  - `startDate`: The date when the unit begins.
  - `endDate`: The date when the unit ends.
  - `sessionNames`: Names of the sessions associated with the unit (e.g., Lecture, Lab).
  - `sessionTimes`: Times when the sessions for the unit occur (e.g., Morning, Afternoon).
  - `comments`: A boolean value indicating whether comments are enabled for this unit.
  - `marks`: A boolean value indicating whether marks are assigned for this unit.
  - `consent`: A boolean value indicating whether consent is required for this unit.
  - `commentSuggestions`: Suggested comments that can be used by facilitators for feedback.

---

### 8. **user Table**
- **Purpose**: This table stores information about the users of the system, including administrators, coordinators, and facilitators. Each user has a role and login credentials.
- **Columns**:
  - `userID`: The unique identifier for each user.
  - `userType`: The type of user (e.g., admin, coordinator, facilitator).
  - `firstName`: The first name of the user.
  - `lastName`: The last name of the user.
  - `passwordHash`: The hashed password used for login authentication.
  - `email`: The email address of the user (unique).
  - `token`: Optional field for storing a session or authentication token.

## Project File Summary

### `createadmin.py`
This script is responsible for creating an admin user in the system, initialising the required administrator account for the application.

### `database.py`
Handles the configuration and connection to the database, including initialising the database models and performing database-related tasks.

### `forms.py`
Contains the form definitions used throughout the application, typically with Flask-WTF, for handling form validation and user inputs on the frontend.

### `helpers.py`
Includes utility functions or helper methods that perform common tasks needed across the application, such as formatting or shared logic.

### `__init__.py`
Initialises the Flask app and sets up configurations, routing, and extensions. This is the entry point for the app's core setup.

### `models.py`
Defines the data models (tables) for the application using an ORM (like SQLAlchemy). This file contains the structure for the database tables and relationships.

### `routes.py`
Defines the routes or endpoints for the web application. It maps URLs to their corresponding view functions, handling requests and responses.

### `static`
Contains static files such as JavaScript, CSS, and other resources (e.g., CSV templates). These files are used to enhance the frontend of the application.

### `templates`
Houses all the HTML files used in the application, following the Jinja2 templating system. These templates define the structure and layout of the web pages rendered by the Flask app.

### `testdb.py`
A script for initialising or populating the database with test data.

### `utilities.py`
Contains utility functions specific to various parts of the application, such as data processing, reading files, or performing operations that don't fit directly into the models or routes.
